The Akbarnama in itself, from which the imagery at hand comes from, is a symbol of power without any need to look further into it.
The lineage of biographies that come before it sets up the power and history of the book’s importance,
within the time it was made and as a symbol of Akbar’s time living as we read it and look upon its illustrations today.
This image depicts a hunting scene, taking place near a town called Palam, described within the Akbarnama.
The scene takes place following the year 1568 after a strenuous takeover of the Chitor fortress.
Victorious, though barely, activities such as this hunting scene would come as a welcome entertainment.
But even the enjoyment of a hunting trip works double as a show of power. This method of hunting that Akbar utilized was a Timurid form called the Qamargah.
The form involved rounding up the hunted animals with the use of a big circle of people that would bring the prey into the center of the circle.
The more important people, in this case, Akbar, could then enter into the circle to assume the role of the hunter.
Akbar can be identified by his center position on the page, as well as the adornments about his character.
Most differentiated from his audience is the plume from his hat, accentuated further by the jewelery teaming from the feather’s base.
It is not to be left out Akbar’s more defining feature in this image: that his is the only one seated on horseback.
His sword far outweighs the stature of any weapon of his audience members.
The jewels strewn upon the horse further accentuate Akbar’s status among those depicted in the image with him.
His chiseled and determined gaze reminds the viewer of the grandeur of this leader!
In addition to these particular elements that differentiate Akbar from the lower hierarchical characters,
the overall composition of his audience encircling around him adds to his importance in this image.
They frame his character and lead the viewer’s eyes back to him.
This is a time of celebration and joy! A man near the bottom of the picture plane enjoys a drink.
Meanwhile, others are enthusiastically, actively taking part of the hunt and watching their leader Akbar. Everyone’s eyes are directed towards him!
This shows his importance among them not only during the scene but also at the time of illustration later around 1590.
Even the animals seem to provide leading lines either exactly towards or leading back into Akbar’s figure.
It is worth mentioning again that Akbar’s lineage that was so important to him and to the Mughals after him. A sharing of qualities was prized!
Ruby Lal explains the importance of hunting activities to Akbar. Hunting was something that Akbar’s ancestry took part in,
so it is even more important that hunting should be described and even mentioned within the Akbarnama,
especially as an activity following victory and therefore a celebration. Even his use of a bow to perform the hunt is a call back to his ancestry.
as the skillmanship of using a bow is a powerful symbol that reflects his ancestors and again speaks to his power in this hierarchy.
As it is quoted within the translation of the Akbarnama,
“From thence he went, hunting by the way, through Mewat, and after spreading the shadow of his justice of the city of Alwar, he moved further forward.”
Power and hierarchy are shown through these elements: formally, the leading lines and content, the decoration of Akbar and the encircling gaze of his audience.
This history of the hunting activity to the Mughal lineage shows both Akbar’s powerful hierarchy
as well as the importance and influence for Akbar to pay strong attention to his own lineage.